docs(framework) Add guide on how to run Flower on GCP (#5327)
adap/flower: framework/docs/source/how-to-run-flower-on-gcp.rst

:og:description: A step-by-step guide to learn how to create, deploy and run a Flower application on the Google Cloud Platform (GCP) using the Google Kubernetes Engine (GKE).
.. meta::
    :description: A step-by-step guide to learn how to create, deploy and run a Flower application on the Google Cloud Platform (GCP) using the Google Kubernetes Engine (GKE).

Run Flower on GCP
=================

> A step-by-step guide to learn how to create, deploy and run a Flower application on the
> Google Cloud Platform (GCP) using the Google Kubernetes Engine (GKE). The figure below

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A step-by-step guide to learn how to create, deploy and run a Flower application on the
`Google Cloud Platform (GCP) <https://console.cloud.google.com>`_ using the `Google Kubernetes Engine (GKE) <https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine>`_. The figure below
```

Let's hyperlink the Google references here since we use it throughout the page.

presents an overview of the architecture of the Flower components we will deploy on GCP
using GKE through the current guide.

.. figure:: ./_static/flower-gke-architecture.png
    :align: center
    :width: 600
    :alt: Running Flower on GCP using GKE Architecture
    :class: no-scaled-link

    Running Flower on GCP using GKE Architecture

Part of this guide has also been presented during the `Flower AI Summit 2025
<https://flower.ai/events/flower-ai-summit-2025/>`_, by Prashant Kulkarni, GenAI
Security Engineer at Google Cloud.

> .. raw:: html
> 
>     <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DoklGCdtrrc" target="_blank" style="display: block; text-align: center;">
>         <img src="https://img.youtube.com/vi/DoklGCdtrrc/0.jpg" alt="Introduction" width="300"/>
>     </a>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. youtube:: DoklGCdtrrc
    :width: 100%
```

Let's embed the YouTube video with the `sphinxcontrib-youtube` plugin and use the video ID.

Author: Good point. I added the following:

```
.. youtube:: DoklGCdtrrc
    :align: center
    :width: 70%
```

so that the video does not occupy too much page space

Create a Kubernetes Cluster
---------------------------

> Here, we will discuss the necessary steps to create an account and a Kubernetes cluster

Reviewer: I think the explanation for creating an account is not included in the 4 points below. Should this be mentioned or maybe we can rephrase it to:

`Here, we outline the steps to create a Kubernetes cluster ...`

Author: I agree, rephrasing the first sentence as you pointed should be enough - We only need to keep the following sentence "Before proceeding, please make sure you have an account on GCP."

in `GCP <https://console.cloud.google.com>`_ through the GCP interface. Before
proceeding, please make sure you have created an account on `GCP

> <https://console.cloud.google.com>`_.

Reviewer: The GCP hyperlinks can be removed once we introduce it at the start.

Author: Good point. Moved the hyperlink to the first sentence of the first paragraph where GCP is introduced for the first time, and removed the hyperlinks thereafter.

1. **Create GCP Project**: Once you have created the account, please create a new

>    project, by pressing on the top button with the project name. This will open a new

Reviewer: On my interface the top button says "Open project picker". I think it's instructive to mention this.

Author: Rephrased this to also include project picker.

   window from where you can press the ``NEW PROJECT`` button and create the new project
   and assign a name, e.g., ``flower-gcp``.

> 2. **Enable Kubernetes API**: After the project creation in the search bar at the top of

Reviewer: Can you please indent points 2 to 4 to match the indentation of point 1? This way, the itemized points will be rendered correctly.

> 2. **Enable Kubernetes API**: After the project creation in the search bar at the top of
> the GCP page type ``Kubernetes Engine API``. This will redirect you to the ``Kubernetes
> Engine API`` Product page. From there you need to select ``Enable``. After the you
> enable it you should see a green mark in the ``Kubernetes Engine API`` saying ``API
> Enabled``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Enable Kubernetes API**: After creating a GCP project, in the search bar at the top of
the GCP page type ``Kubernetes Engine API`` and click on it (it has an ``API`` icon). This will redirect you to the ``Kubernetes
Engine API`` Product page. From there you need to select ``Enable``. After you
enable it you should see a green mark in the ``Kubernetes Engine API`` saying ``API
Enabled``.
```

Author: We could but I am not sure whether we should point/clarify what the necessary actions are in this case, because some times this might be different from user to user.

Reviewer: You could say something along the lines of "If you see the ‘Billing required’ pop-up, please check with your administrator to continue, if necessary.".

3. **Create Kubernetes Cluster**: in the home page of the GCP project, under the
``Products`` section, look for the a tab that is called ``Create a Kubernetes Cluster``.
This will redirect you to a page where you will see an overview of the existing
Kubernetes clusters. At the top of the page you should see a button called ``Create``.
By default, the Kubernetes clusters are deployed using the ``Autopilot`` mode. For the
current guide, we use the ``Autopilot`` mode; in an advanced version of this guide, we

> shall deploy a cluster using the ``Standard`` mode.

Reviewer: Is the ``Standard`` guide ready? Perhaps we can hyperlink it here. Also, let's refer to it as the comprehensive guide instead of advanced guide.

Author: Removed for now.

4. **Configure Kubernetes Cluster**: in the page that is shown, we assign a name to the
new cluster, e.g., ``flower-numpy-example`` and we select the region, e.g.,
``us-central1``. For the rest of the configuration settings, such as ``Cluster Tier``,
``Fleet Registration``, ``Networking``, and other settings we use the default values.
Now, press the ``Create`` button.

.. note::

    Please wait for a couple of minutes until the cluster is ready and fully deployed.

Configure Google Cloud SDK
--------------------------

> To start interacting with the our newly deployed Kubernetes cluster we need to configure
> locally the Google Cloud SDK. The SDK will allow us to interact with the Google Cloud
> Platform and in turn with out recently deployed Kubernetes cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To interact with our newly deployed Kubernetes cluster, we will use Google Cloud SDK and configure it locally. This SDK allows us to directly interact with GCP and in turn with our recently deployed Kubernetes cluster.
```

    source ~/.bashrc  # update PATH
    gcloud version  # verify installation

.. note::

    For more detailed installation instructions and for installing ``gcloud`` for
    different operating systems, please take look at the official ``gcloud`` CLI
    installation page https://cloud.google.com/sdk/docs/install

Once ``gcloud`` is installed we need to install ``kubectl``:

.. code-block:: bash

    gcloud components install kubectl
    kubectl version --client  # this will show the installed versions of the Client and Kustomize

Now you need to configure ``kubectl`` to point to the GKE cluster you created in the
previous steps by using the name of the cluster, e.g., ``flower-numpy-example``, and the
name of the region where the cluster was created:

.. code-block:: bash

    gcloud container clusters get-credentials flower-numpy-example --region us-central1

This will configure the required metadata and fetch the necessary credentials to allow
your local ``kubectl`` to communicate with the GKE cluster. To verify that ``kubectl``
was able to connect to the cluster and get the necessary information, you can run the
following command:

.. code-block:: bash

>     kubectl config current-context  # this should return the Kubernetes cluster you connected

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    kubectl config current-context  # this should return the Kubernetes cluster you are connected to
```

.. note::

>     For more information on how ``kubectl`` works, please have a look at the following
>     official quick-reference guide:
>     https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubectl/quick-reference/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For more information on how ``kubectl`` works, please refer to the `official quick-reference guide <https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubectl/quick-reference/>`_
    
```

> Create a Google Artifact Repository

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create an Artifact Registry
```

From the [docs](https://cloud.google.com/artifact-registry/docs), it's called "Artifact Registry". Should we update this?

Author: Let's keep `Google` and replace `Repository` with `Registry`.

-----------------------------------

The Google Cloud Artifact Registry is a fully managed, scalable, and private service for
storing and managing software build artifacts and dependencies. Consequently, to run our
Flower application on the GKE cluster, we need to store the application's specific
Flower Docker images within the registry, i.e., ``ClientApp`` and ``ServerApp``, which

> we discuss in the next section. This step is crucial as it enables the cluster, and

Reviewer: I think we should clarify that for typical use-cases, the SuperLink and SuperNode images do not need to be built and can be pulled directly from Docker Hub. This is why only the `ClientApp` and `ServerApp` images need to be stored on the Artifact Registry and not the SuperNode and SuperLink images. Is this correct?

Author: That's correct. I already mention this in a note in the  `Configure Flower Application Docker Images` section. Should I move the note or the text to this section?

Author: @chongshenng I elaborated based on your feedback - closing this.

subsequently the pods, to download the built Docker images and deploy the necessary
Flower components.

There are two ways to create the required registry, one through the UI and another
through the CLI., below we discuss both approaches.

> **Create through UI**:

Reviewer 2: Given that `gcloud` is installed I wonder if it's enough to keep the `through CLI` instructions. Part of the motivation is related to keeping this guide up to date. The UI might change more often than CLI.

- we need to go to the ``APIs & Services`` and then look for ``Library``.
- we search for ``Artifact Registry API`` and we enable the API (if it's not already
  enabled).
- once the ``Artifact Registry API`` is enabled, we navigate to the `Artifact Registry
  page <https://console.cloud.google.com/artifacts>`_ and we select ``Create
  Repository``.

> - we enter the name of the new repository, e.g., ``flower-gcp-example-artifacts``, we

Reviewer: Can we use the imperative tone for the guide? For example:

```
- Navigate to `APIs & Services` and click on `Library`.
- Search for `Artifact Registry API` and enable the API. (Clarify where to search here)
- ...
```

Author: In the latest version we remove the UI guide since it might not always remain the same.

  then choose ``Docker`` as format, ``Standard`` as mode and we pick a location type and
  region, e.g., ``Region: us-central``.

For all the rest of the fields, such as ``Encryption``, ``Immutable image tags``,
``Cleanup Policies``, and ``Artifact Analysis`` we leave the default values. Finally, we
press ``Create``.

**Create through CLI**:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Enable the Artifact Registry API service
    gcloud services enable artifactregistry.googleapis.com

    # Create the repository
    # gcloud artifacts repositories create YOUR_REPOSITORY_NAME

>     gcloud artifacts repositories create flower-gcp-example-artifacts \
>     --repository-format=docker \
>     --location=us-central1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    gcloud artifacts repositories create flower-gcp-example-artifacts \
        --repository-format=docker \
        --location=us-central1
```

>     # Configure Docker to Authenticate with Artifact Registry:
>     # gcloud auth configure-docker YOUR_REGION-docker.pkg.dev

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # Configure Docker to Authenticate with Artifact Registry, e.g.:
    #   gcloud auth configure-docker YOUR_REGION-docker.pkg.dev
```

    gcloud auth configure-docker us-central1-docker.pkg.dev  # we use us-central1 as our region

Configure Flower Application Docker Images
------------------------------------------

In order to proceed with this next step, first, we create a local Flower application,
and then create a dedicated Dockerfile for the ServerApp and the ClientApp Docker
images. Once we build the images, we tag them and push them to the newly created Google
registry. Most of the steps on how to build Docker images discussed below are based on
the `Flower Quickstart with Docker Tutorial
<https://flower.ai/docs/framework/docker/tutorial-quickstart-docker.html>`_.

.. note::

>     We do not create a Dockerfile for the SuperLink or the SuperNode components, since

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    We do not need to create a Dockerfile for the SuperLink or the SuperNode components, since
```

    we only need to use the default provided by the official `Flower DockerHub
    repository <https://hub.docker.com/u/flwr>`_.

We create the Flower NumPy application as follows:

.. code-block:: bash

    # flwr new YOUR_APP_NAME --framework YOUR_ML_FRAMEWORK --username YOUR_USERNAME
    flwr new flower-numpy-example --framework NumPy --username flower

Create Docker Images
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Once the application is created, we navigate inside the parent directory and create two

> ``Dockerfiles`` one for the ``ClientApp`` component, named ``clientapp.Dockerfile`` and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``Dockerfile``\s one for the ``ClientApp`` component, named ``clientapp.Dockerfile`` and
```

one for the ``ServerApp`` component, named as ``serverapp.Dockerfile``. We will use both
files to build locally the necessary Docker images.

.. dropdown:: clientapp.Dockerfile

    .. code-block:: bash

        # clientapp.Dockerfile
        ARG FLWR_VERSION

>         FROM flwr/clientapp:${FLWR_VERSION}  # set the Flower version, e.g., 1.18.0

Reviewer: You can use the placeholder `stable_flwr_version` to keep the `FLWR_VERSION` updated. For example, refer to [this line](https://github.com/adap/flower/blob/44e5e046719ab0d72e99a96fec18686abad41391/framework/docs/source/docker/tutorial-quickstart-docker.rst#L104).

>         FROM flwr/clientapp:${FLWR_VERSION}  # set the Flower version, e.g., 1.18.0

Author: Nice suggestion @chongshenng , I used the substitution approach as you suggested. 

@jafermarq I removed all references to the `FLWR_VERSION` env variable and how it should be set, the related comments, as well as the `docker build --with-args` command.

        WORKDIR /app

>         COPY pyproject.toml .
>         RUN sed -i 's/.*flwr\[simulation\].*//' pyproject.toml \
>             && python -m pip install -U --no-cache-dir .

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        # Install the dependencies needed by your app
        RUN pip install numpy
```

Reviewer 2: What's your opinion on replacing the original command with the above ? I think it's cleaner

Author: We could even though what we have already could be easily used for other apps too. I think it is better to keep it as is, so that we can use it for other (custom) apps too that go from simulation to deployment. Maybe we can add some text to reflect this, e.g., " Even though the current app has only `numpy` as a dependency, you can use the provided `ClientApp` and `ServerApp` Dockerfiles to create the corresponding images for any application when going from simulation to deployment. The `RUN` command installs all the necessary dependencies of your app and removes the `flwr[simulation]` when building the Docker images. "

Reviewer 2: sounds good to me adding a mini comment saying what that scary-to-some `RUN` command does

            name: superlink-fleetapi
          - protocol: TCP
            port: 9093   # Port for Flower applications
            targetPort: 9093  # the SuperLink container port
            name: superlink-execapi
          type: LoadBalancer  # balances workload, makes the service publicly available

.. dropdown:: supernode-1-deployment.yaml

    .. code-block:: bash

        apiVersion: apps/v1
        kind: Deployment
        metadata:
          name: supernode-1
        spec:
          replicas: 1
          selector:
            matchLabels:
              app: supernode-1
          template:
            metadata:
              labels:
                app: supernode-1
            spec:
              containers:
              - name: supernode
                image: flwr/supernode:${FLWR_VERSION}  # set the Flower version, e.g., 1.18.0
                args:
                  - "--insecure"
                  - "--superlink"
                  - "superlink-service:9092"
                  - "--clientappio-api-address"
                  - "0.0.0.0:9094"
                  - "--isolation"
                  - "process"
                  - "--node-config"

>                   - "partition-id=0 num-partitions=2"

Reviewer 2: There is no need for this in the numpy app. Let's remove it? or explain why it is here ?

Author: Indeed we do not need it for the current running example. Removed.

Google Console, select ``Kubernetes Engine`` and then the ``Workloads`` page. The new
window that appears will show the status of the pods under deployment.

.. caution::

    Please wait for a couple of minutes (3' to 5' minutes should be enough) before the
    ``Pods`` are up and running. While ``Pods`` resources are being provisioned, some
    warnings are expected.

Run Flower Application
----------------------

Once all ``Pods`` are up and running, we need to get the ``EXTERNAL_IP`` of the
``superlink-service`` and point our Flower application to use the Kubernetes cluster to
submit and execute the job.

To get the ``EXTERNAL-IP`` of the ``superlink-service`` we run the following command,
which will show the ``NAME``, ``TYPE``, ``CLUSTER-IP``, ``EXTERNAL-IP`` and ``PORTS`` of
the service:

.. code-block:: bash

    kubectl get service superlink-service

After we get the ``EXTERNAL-IP`` , we go to the directory of the Flower example, we open
the ``pyproject.toml`` and then add the following section at the end of the file:

.. code-block:: bash

    [tool.flwr.federations.gcp-deployment]
    address = "<EXTERNAL_IP>:9093" # replace the EXTERNAL_IP with the correct value

>     insecure = true

Reviewer 2: Let's add a comment about how to enable TLS  and point to https://flower.ai/docs/framework/how-to-enable-tls-connections.html ?

Reviewer: Can we just make a note saying it's insecure, refer to the other page if they want to know more, and then say this tutorial will be updated later?

Author: Added a note to refer to the guide!

Then we can execute the example on the GCP cluster by running:

.. code-block:: bash

    flwr run . gcp-deployment --stream

If the job is successfully submitted, and executed, then in your console you should see
the ``fit`` and ``evaluate`` configuration and execution execution per round, and in the

> end a ``Summary`` of the performance per round.

Reviewer 2: Let's complement this and show the terminal output as we do for example in our quickstar tutorials ?: https://flower.ai/docs/framework/tutorial-quickstart-pytorch.html

Author: Thank you for the pointer. I added the output inside a collapsable/dropdown section.

an overview of the architecture of the Flower components we will deploy on GCP using
GKE.

.. figure:: ./_static/flower-gke-architecture.png
    :align: center
    :width: 100%
    :alt: Running Flower on GCP using GKE Architecture
    :class: no-scaled-link

    Running Flower on GCP using GKE Architecture

Part of this guide has also been presented during the `Flower AI Summit 2025
<https://flower.ai/events/flower-ai-summit-2025/>`_, by Prashant Kulkarni, GenAI
Security Engineer at Google Cloud.

.. youtube:: DoklGCdtrrc
    :align: center
    :width: 70%

Create a Kubernetes Cluster
---------------------------

Here, we outline the steps to create a Kubernetes cluster in GCP through the GCP user
interface. Before proceeding, please make sure you have an account on GCP.

1. **Create GCP Project**: Once you have created the account, please create a new
   project, by selecting the project picker button, i.e., the button with the project
   name appearing at the top of the page. This will open a new window from where you can
   press the ``NEW PROJECT`` button and create the new project and assign a name, e.g.,
   ``flower-gcp``.

> 2. **Enable Kubernetes API**: After project creating a GCP project, in the search bar at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Enable Kubernetes API**: After the GCP project is created, in the search bar at
```

Reviewer: We also need to ensure that the `flower-gcp` project is selected in the top left corner, before enabling the Kubernetes Engine API.

    # macOS (w/ Homebrew)
    brew install --cask google-cloud-sdk

    # Windows
    # Download the Windows installer from the Google Cloud SDK page
    # https://dl.google.com/dl/cloudsdk/channels/rapid/GoogleCloudSDKInstaller.exe
    # Run the .exe installer and follow the on-screen instructions

    # Once the package is installed (e.g., using brew), we initialize gcloud as follows:
    gcloud init  # initialize with gcloud init.
    gcloud version  # verify installation

.. note::

    For more detailed installation instructions and for installing ``gcloud`` for
    different operating systems, please take look at the official ``gcloud`` CLI
    installation page https://cloud.google.com/sdk/docs/install

Once ``gcloud`` is installed we need to install ``kubectl``, which is a command-line
tool to interact with Kubernetes clusters:

.. code-block:: bash

    gcloud components install kubectl
    kubectl version --client  # this will show the installed versions of the Client and Kustomize

Now you need to configure ``kubectl`` to point to the GKE cluster you created in the
previous steps by using the name of the cluster, e.g., ``flower-numpy-example``, and the

> name of the region where the cluster was created:

Reviewer: Before this step, we should mention that for first time users, they need to have an active account selected. Otherwise, they'll see this message when running `gcloud container clusters ...`:

```shell
ERROR: (gcloud.container.clusters.get-credentials) You do not currently have an active account selected.
Please run:

  $ gcloud auth login

to obtain new credentials.

If you have already logged in with a different account, run:

  $ gcloud config set account ACCOUNT

to select an already authenticated account to use.
```

Reviewer: We also need to set the `[project]` property, because I get this error:
```shell
➜ gcloud container clusters get-credentials flower-numpy-example --region us-central1
ERROR: (gcloud.container.clusters.get-credentials) The required property [project] is not currently set.
It can be set on a per-command basis by re-running your command with the [--project] flag.

You may set it for your current workspace by running:

  $ gcloud config set project VALUE

or it can be set temporarily by the environment variable [CLOUDSDK_CORE_PROJECT]
```

Author: Great feedback!! Incorporated!

within the registry, i.e., ``ClientApp`` and ``ServerApp``, which we discuss in the next
section. For typical use-cases, the Flower SuperLink and SuperNode Docker images do not
need to be built and can be pulled directly from the official `Flower DockerHub
repository <https://hub.docker.com/u/flwr>`_. This step is crucial as it enables the
cluster, and subsequently the ``Pods``, to download the built Docker images and deploy
the necessary Flower components. Please see below the instructions on how to create the
repository using the ``gcloud`` CLI:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Enable the Artifact Registry API service
    gcloud services enable artifactregistry.googleapis.com

    # Create the repository
    # gcloud artifacts repositories create YOUR_REPOSITORY_NAME
    gcloud artifacts repositories create flower-gcp-example-artifacts \
        --repository-format=docker \
        --location=us-central1

    # Configure Docker to Authenticate with Artifact Registry, e.g.:
    #   gcloud auth configure-docker YOUR_REGION-docker.pkg.dev
    gcloud auth configure-docker us-central1-docker.pkg.dev  # we use us-central1 as our region

> 

Reviewer: We need to add two steps here to ensure correct access and to identify the correct project name for the subsequent steps.

1. Verify the created repository:
```shell
$ gcloud artifacts repositories list --location=us-central1
Listing items under project flower-gcp-460409, location us-central1.

REPOSITORY                     FORMAT ... SIZE (MB)
flower-gcp-example-artifacts   DOCKER ... 0 
```
The above shows that the `flower-gcp-example-artifacts` repository has been successfully created under the project `flower-gcp-460409`. This project ID will be different for each user and will be used for the next steps.

2. Update the role of the user to allow write permissions to the artifact registry.
```shell
gcloud projects add-iam-policy-binding flower-gcp-460409 \
  --member="user:<YOUR_EMAIL@DOMAIN.COM>" \
  --role="roles/artifactregistry.writer"
```

Author: Incorporated as a new subsection called `Google Artifact Registry Permissions` inside the `Create a Google Artifact Registry` section.

            targetPort: 9094

.. dropdown:: supernode-2-deployment.yaml

    .. code-block:: bash
        :substitutions:

        apiVersion: apps/v1
        kind: Deployment
        metadata:
          name: supernode-2
        spec:
          replicas: 1
          selector:
            matchLabels:
              app: supernode-2
          template:
            metadata:
              labels:
                app: supernode-2
            spec:
              containers:
              - name: supernode
                image: flwr/supernode:|stable_flwr_version|
                args:
                  - "--insecure"
                  - "--superlink"
                  - "superlink-service:9092"
                  - "--clientappio-api-address"
                  - "0.0.0.0:9094"
                  - "--isolation"
                  - "process"
                ports:
                - containerPort: 9094
        ---
        apiVersion: v1
        kind: Service
        metadata:
          name: supernode-2-service
        spec:
          selector:
            app: supernode-2
          ports:
          - protocol: TCP
            port: 9094
            targetPort: 9094

> .. dropdown:: serverapp-1-deployment.yaml

Author: Good point! Changed

    .. code-block:: bash

        apiVersion: apps/v1
        kind: Deployment
        metadata:
          name: serverapp
        spec:
          replicas: 1
          selector:
            matchLabels:
              app: serverapp
          template:
            metadata:
              labels:
                app: serverapp
            spec:
              containers:
              - name: serverapp
                image: us-central1-docker.pkg.dev/flower-gcp/flower-gcp-example-artifacts/flower_numpy_example_serverapp:0.0.1
                args:
                  - "--insecure"
                  - "--serverappio-api-address"
                  - "superlink-service:9091"

.. dropdown:: clientapp-1-deployment.yaml

    .. code-block:: bash

        apiVersion: apps/v1
        kind: Deployment
        metadata:
          name: clientapp-1
        spec:
          replicas: 1
          selector:
            matchLabels:
              app: clientapp-1
          template:
            metadata:
              labels:
                app: clientapp-1
            spec:
              containers:
              - name: clientapp

>                 image: us-central1-docker.pkg.dev/flower-gcp/flower-gcp-example-artifacts/flower_numpy_example_clientapp:0.0.1

Reviewer: Update this line to use the correct project ID. It should be `flower-gcp-XXXX` instead of `flower-gcp`.

Author: added the following comment above the line `# Please change <YOUR_PROJECT_ID> to your project identifier` and replaced `.../flower-gcp/...` with `<YOUR_PROJECT_ID>`

                args:
                  - "--insecure"
                  - "--clientappio-api-address"
                  - "supernode-1-service:9094"

.. dropdown:: clientapp-2-deployment.yaml

    .. code-block:: bash

        apiVersion: apps/v1
        kind: Deployment
        metadata:
          name: clientapp-2
        spec:
          replicas: 1
          selector:
            matchLabels:
              app: clientapp-2
          template:
            metadata:
              labels:
                app: clientapp-2
            spec:
              containers:
              - name: clientapp

>                 image: us-central1-docker.pkg.dev/flower-gcp/flower-gcp-example-artifacts/flower_numpy_example_clientapp:0.0.1

Reviewer: Update this line to use the correct project ID. It should be `flower-gcp-XXXX` instead of `flower-gcp`.

Author: same as above

        INFO :      aggregate_evaluate: received 2 results and 0 failures
        WARNING :   No evaluate_metrics_aggregation_fn provided
        INFO :
        INFO :      [ROUND 2]
        INFO :      configure_fit: strategy sampled 2 clients (out of 2)
        INFO :      aggregate_fit: received 2 results and 0 failures
        INFO :      configure_evaluate: strategy sampled 2 clients (out of 2)
        INFO :      aggregate_evaluate: received 2 results and 0 failures
        INFO :
        INFO :      [ROUND 3]
        INFO :      configure_fit: strategy sampled 2 clients (out of 2)
        INFO :      aggregate_fit: received 2 results and 0 failures
        INFO :      configure_evaluate: strategy sampled 2 clients (out of 2)
        INFO :      aggregate_evaluate: received 2 results and 0 failures
        INFO :
        INFO :      [SUMMARY]
        INFO :      Run finished 3 round(s) in 30.11s
        INFO :          History (loss, distributed):
        INFO :                  round 1: 0.0
        INFO :                  round 2: 0.0
        INFO :                  round 3: 0.0
        INFO :

.. note::

>     Please note that if you terminate or shut down the cluster, and create a new one,

Reviewer: It'd be instructive to include a guide for tearing down the pods as well, using `kubectl delete -f <filenames.yaml>`.

Author: Good point. I added a new section at the end of the document and a dropdown button, named `k8s-shutdown.sh`, similar to `k8s-deploy.sh`, except for the different `kubectl` command.

   Tier``, ``Fleet Registration``, ``Networking``, and other settings we use the default
   values. Now, press the ``Create`` button.

.. note::

    Please wait for a couple of minutes until the cluster is ready and fully deployed.

Configure Google Cloud SDK
--------------------------

To interact with our newly deployed Kubernetes cluster, we will use the Google Cloud SDK
and configure it locally. This SDK allows us to directly interact with GCP and in turn
with our recently deployed Kubernetes cluster.

To install the Google Cloud SDK, we first need to install and configure the ``gcloud``
CLI:

.. code-block:: bash

    # macOS
    curl https://sdk.cloud.google.com | bash  # and then follow on-screen prompts

    # macOS (w/ Homebrew)
    brew install --cask google-cloud-sdk

    # Windows
    # Download the Windows installer from the Google Cloud SDK page
    # https://dl.google.com/dl/cloudsdk/channels/rapid/GoogleCloudSDKInstaller.exe
    # Run the .exe installer and follow the on-screen instructions

    # Once the package is installed, we initialize gcloud as follows:
    gcloud init  # initialize with gcloud init.

>     source ~/.bashrc  # update PATH

Author: Removed sourcing and expanded comment as follows:
`# Once the package is installed (e.g., using brew), we initialize gcloud as follows:`

    # gcloud artifacts repositories create YOUR_REPOSITORY_NAME
    gcloud artifacts repositories create flower-gcp-example-artifacts \
        --repository-format=docker \
        --location=us-central1

    # Configure Docker to Authenticate with Artifact Registry, e.g.:
    #   gcloud auth configure-docker YOUR_REGION-docker.pkg.dev
    gcloud auth configure-docker us-central1-docker.pkg.dev  # we use us-central1 as our region

Configure Flower Application Docker Images
------------------------------------------

In order to proceed with this next step, first, we create a local Flower application,
and then create a dedicated Dockerfile for the ServerApp and the ClientApp Docker
images. Once we build the images, we tag them and push them to the newly created Google
registry. Most of the steps on how to build Docker images discussed below are based on
the `Flower Quickstart with Docker Tutorial
<https://flower.ai/docs/framework/docker/tutorial-quickstart-docker.html>`_.

.. note::

    For this application, we do not need to create a Docker image for the SuperLink and
    the SuperNode components, since we only need to use the default images provided in

>     the official Flower DockerHub repository.

Author: Let's keep it b/c this was raised by @chongshenng

    .. code-block:: bash
        :substitutions:

        # clientapp.Dockerfile
        FROM flwr/clientapp:|stable_flwr_version|

        WORKDIR /app

        COPY pyproject.toml .
        RUN sed -i 's/.*flwr\[simulation\].*//' pyproject.toml \
            && python -m pip install -U --no-cache-dir .

        ENTRYPOINT ["flwr-clientapp"]

.. dropdown:: serverapp.Dockerfile

    .. code-block:: bash
        :substitutions:

        # serverapp.Dockerfile
        FROM flwr/serverapp:|stable_flwr_version|

        WORKDIR /app

        COPY pyproject.toml .
        RUN sed -i 's/.*flwr\[simulation\].*//' pyproject.toml \
           && python -m pip install -U --no-cache-dir .

        ENTRYPOINT ["flwr-serverapp"]

Once we have created the required Dockerfiles, we build the Docker Images as follows:

.. important::

    Before running the commands below, make sure ``Docker`` is installed and it is up
    running. The ``--platform`` type is set to ``linux/amd64``, because when using the
    ``Autopilot`` mode, all ``Pods`` in the Kubernetes cluster (by default) are deployed
    with an ``amd64``-based architecture.

.. code-block:: bash

    # ServerApp

>     docker build --platform linux/amd64 -f serverapp.Dockerfile -t flower_numpy_example_serverapp:0.0.1 .

Author: Good point but better do this in the next iteration though.

    # ClientApp
    docker build --platform linux/amd64 -f clientapp.Dockerfile -t flower_numpy_example_clientapp:0.0.1 .

Tag Docker Images
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Before we are able to push our two newly locally created Docker images, we need to tag
them with the Google Artifact Registry repository name and image name we created during
the previous steps. If you have followed the earlier naming suggestions, then the
project ID is ``flower-gcp``, the repository name is ``flower-gcp-example-artifacts``,
the local Docker images names are ``flower_numpy_example_serverapp:0.0.1`` and
``flower_numpy_example_numpy:0.0.1``, and the region is ``us-central1``. Putting all
this together, the final commands you need to run to tag the ``ServerApp`` and
``ClientApp`` Docker images are:

.. code-block:: bash

    # docker tag YOUR_IMAGE_NAME YOUR_REGION-docker.pkg.dev/YOUR_PROJECT_ID/YOUR_REPOSITORY_NAME/YOUR_IMAGE_NAME:YOUR_TAG

    # ServerApp

>     docker tag flower_numpy_example_serverapp:0.0.1 us-central1-docker.pkg.dev/flower-gcp/flower-gcp-example-artifacts/flower_numpy_example_serverapp:0.0.1

Author: let's keep it as is for now

    Make sure the Flower version you use to deploy the ``Pods`` matches the version of
    your Flower Application.

.. dropdown:: k8s-deploy.sh

    .. code-block:: bash

        #! /bin/bash -l

        # Change directory to the yaml files directory
        cd "$(dirname "${BASH_SOURCE[0]}")"

        kubectl apply -f superlink-deployment.yaml
        sleep 0.1

        kubectl apply -f supernode-1-deployment.yaml
        sleep 0.1

        kubectl apply -f supernode-2-deployment.yaml
        sleep 0.1

        kubectl apply -f ./serverapp-deployment.yaml
        sleep 0.1

        kubectl apply -f ./clientapp-1-deployment.yaml
        sleep 0.1

        kubectl apply -f ./clientapp-2-deployment.yaml
        sleep 0.1

To see that your ``Pods`` are deployed, please go to the ``Navigation Menu`` on the
Google Console, select ``Kubernetes Engine`` and then the ``Workloads`` page. The new
window that appears will show the status of the ``Pods`` under deployment.

.. caution::

    Please wait for a couple of minutes (3' to 5' minutes should be enough) before the
    ``Pods`` are up and running. While ``Pods`` resources are being provisioned, some
    warnings are expected.

> Run Flower Application

Author: I will change wherever it is necessary

the service:

.. code-block:: bash

    kubectl get service superlink-service

After we get the ``EXTERNAL-IP`` , we go to the directory of the Flower example, we open
the ``pyproject.toml`` and then add the following section at the end of the file:

.. code-block:: bash

    [tool.flwr.federations.gcp-deployment]
    address = "<EXTERNAL_IP>:9093" # replace the EXTERNAL_IP with the correct value
    insecure = true

Then we can execute the example on the GCP cluster by running:

.. code-block:: bash

    flwr run . gcp-deployment --stream

.. note::

    Please note that in the current deployment, communication is not encrypted. To
    enable TLS for secure connections, check the following `guide
    <https://flower.ai/docs/framework/how-to-enable-tls-connections.html>`_. We will
    also be updating the current guide soon with more details on how to configure TLS.

If the job is successfully submitted, and executed, then in your console you should see
the ``fit`` and ``evaluate`` configuration and execution execution per round, and in the
end a ``Summary`` of the performance per round. The output should look like the one

> shared below.

Author: Nice!!
